good afternoon and welcome to the latest
number 10
press conference i'm very pleased to be
joined by uh jonathan van tamb deputy
chief
medical officer and simon stevens chief
executive of nhs
england it is almost a year since
humanity has been tormented by
covid across the world economic output
has plummeted
and a million and a half people have
died all the time we've been waiting and
hoping
for the day when the searchlights of
science
would pick out our invisible enemy and
give us
the power to stop that enemy from
making us ill and now the scientists
have done it and they've used the virus
itself to perform a kind of biological
jujitsu
to turn the virus on itself in the form
of a
of a vaccine in a an idea that i think
was pioneered in this country
by edward jenner in 1796
and today we can announce that the
government has accepted the
recommendation from the independent
medicines and healthcare products
regulatory agency
to approve the pfizer biontech vaccine
for distribution across the united
kingdom after months of clinical trials
involving
thousands of people to ensure that the
vaccine meets the strictest
internationally recognized standards of
safety quality
and effectiveness thanks to the
fantastic work of
kate bingham and the vaccines task force
we've purchased
more than 350 million doses of seven
different vaccine candidates and the uk
was the first country in the world to
pre-order supplies of this
pfizer vaccine securing 40 million doses
through our winter plan the nhs has been
preparing for the biggest program
of mass vaccination in the history of
the uk and that's going to begin
next week and in line with the advice
of the independent joint committee on
vaccination
and immunization the first phase will
include
care home residents health and care
staff the elderly
and those who are clinically extremely
vulnerable
but there are immense logistical
challenges
the virus has got to be stored at minus
70 degrees
each person needs two injections three
weeks apart
so it will inevitably take some months
before all the most
vulnerable are protected long cold
months so
it's all the more vital that as we
celebrate this scientific achievement
we're not
carried away uh with over optimism
or fall into the naive belief
that the struggle is over it's not we've
got to stick to
our winter plan a comprehensive program
to suppress the virus
protect the nhs and the vulnerable keep
education
and the economy going and use treatments
testing
and vaccines to enable us to return to
much closer to normal
by the spring today in england we've
ended national restrictions
opening up significant parts of the
economy in doing so
but also replacing them with tough tears
to keep
this virus down and i know that those
tears will mean continued
hardship for for many and it's going to
continue to be
tough for some sectors but until the
vaccine
is deployed our plan does rely
on all of us continuing to make
sacrifices to protect
those we love so please please continue
to follow
the rules where you live remember hands
face
space and if you live in a tier
3 area where community
testing will be made available please
take part in that community testing
these steps are for now the surest way
to protect yourselves and those you love
and by reducing the transmission of the
virus
help de-escalate your area
to a lower level of restrictions as
as vaccines and testing as i say take an
ever larger share
of the burden as we do all this
we're no longer resting on the mere hope
that we can return to normal
next year in the spring but rather the
sure
and certain knowledge that we will will
succeed and
together reclaim our lives and all the
things about our lives
that we love so i want to thank the
scientists and all those
around the world who've taken part uh in
the trials and got us to this stage
and i want to hand over now to simon
stevens of the nhs
uh thank you and uh good afternoon
obviously as the prime minister
says today is a news uh
bringing great optimism we have a
vaccine that has been independently
shown to be
both safe and effective but i suspect
that what people
want are practical answers to three
questions
who will be first in line when will the
vaccines be available
and how will we get it to you from the
nhs
so taking those three questions in turn
first of all in terms of who
will be first in line as the prime
minister says the
independent medical experts the joint
committee on vaccination and
immunization
have clearly recommended that the nhs
should make sure
that the first people to be offered the
vaccine are those at
highest risk together with the people
who look after them
in practice what that means is starting
with the
over 80s who are at much higher risk of
severe outcomes from coronavirus as well
as people in care homes
together with some of the frontline
health and social care staff who are
looking after them
and then as more vaccine becomes
available we will be
in the new year extending that to many
more people
across the country in line with the jcvi
recommendations
so that in turn helps answer the
question when in that
although we are the first health service
in the world to be able to get
vaccinating
supplies from the manufacturer are
phased
so the initial tranche in december is
going to enable us to get started
but the bulk of this vaccination program
either through this vaccine
or hopefully others as well that will
join it will take place
in the period january through to march
or april for the
at-risk population
the majority of the early vaccinations
will as i say be for the over 80s and
for
care home residents and since you need
two jabs with an initial injection and
then a booster
typically around 21 days apart that
means that
we've got to reserve the second dose for
the people who are getting the first
dose in december
to make sure that that second dose is
available for them
and it also means that the people who
are getting the first dose in december
will not have the full protection from
the vaccine
until they get the second dose in
january which
emphasizes the point that we need to
continue to be extremely careful
during december and into january and
then as the vaccination expands to
the wider population so that's who
and that's when in terms of how
the vaccine that has been approved for
the nhs to deploy
today the fisa beyond tech vaccine has
been
independently shown to be medically safe
but it is
logistically complicated we have to move
it around the country
in a carefully controlled way initially
at minus 70 degrees centigrade or
thereabouts
and then there are a limited number of
further movements that we are
allowed by the regulator to make it also
comes in packs of 975 people's doses
so you can't at this point just
distribute it to
every individual gp surgery or pharmacy
as we normally would for many of the
other vaccines available
on the nhs so
the phasing of delivery the way we will
do it
is that next week around 50 hospital
hubs
across england will start offering the
vaccine
to the over 80s and to care home
staff and others identified by the jcvi
typically they may be people who were
already down to come into hospital next
week for an outpatient appointment
so if you're going to be one of those
people next week or in the
weeks that follow the hospital will get
in touch with you
you don't need to do anything about it
yourself
that will then be followed in the
subsequent weeks
with gp practices coming together in
each area
to operate local vaccination centers
and that will grow to over a thousand
places
right across england where gps will be
in touch with their at-risk patients
inviting people to come forward for
vaccination
we've had an excellent response from gps
across the nhs wanting to participate in
this program
and as the extra vaccine comes available
we'll be able to turn on more of those
gp led clinics
and then if the mhra the independent
regulator
as we expect they will give approval for
a safe way of splitting these packs of
975 doses
then the good news is that we will be
able to start
distributing those two care homes
and then as even more vaccine becomes
available
finally we will be able to switch on
large vaccination centers across the
country
and indeed invite local community
pharmacists
probably at the beginning of january to
begin to offer vaccination
as well so in a nutshell
this is going to be a phased program we
the nhs
your gp or your hospital the nhs will
contact you
if you are ready to be offered the
vaccination
and today of course is a day of great
optimism but for all the reasons i've
said i think it needs
to be tempered with realism around
phasing
the nhs has got a fantastic track record
around vaccine delivery
but this is the first time in the world
that these particularly complicated
logistics are being put into practice
and finally i should of course conclude
i think with a big thank you to
not only the scientists and the
researchers who
have managed to produce this vaccine but
to all of my fellow staff across the
health service
the nurses and doctors and the
therapists and the paramedics
who are all going to now mobilize for
what is the biggest vaccination campaign
in our history thank you thanks very
much simon uh
john with anything to add thanks prime
minister
yes i'd like to add a few um science
reflections if i may
and and begin with the fact to tell you
quite openly and i don't mind telling
you
um i'm not saying it for effect the
office will tell you it's true
that i was quite emotional this morning
when i heard
june reign seminar mohammed and wei shen
lim
lay out how they got very meticulously
to their conclusions about the fisa
vaccine
and what a momentous you know journey
and international effort it has been
um discovery by two scientists who
originally
um lived in turkey development by a
german biotech company
involvement of a massive u.s
pharmaceutical giant
and then involvement of our own uk mhra
to bring home the goods in terms of the
uk what a fantastic
journey and i i gave you the train
analogy many weeks ago now
the train has now slowed down safely it
has now stopped in the station
and the doors have opened that was the
authorization
by the mhra what we need now is for
people to get on that train
and travel safely to their destinations
those destinations are all over the uk
this train is going to stop several
times on the way
it's going to have to reach all parts of
the uk
there will be trains that come behind it
and that is all going to take time
so everyone needs to be delighted with
the news today
but equally patient and realistic
about how this rolls out over the next
few months
and now some serious science points
number one we have one authorized
vaccine
but we need more we're very hopeful we
will get some more
but it is still possible that some of
the ones in development
will fall by the wayside and you have to
be prepared for that
we then need assured supply and that is
a big
and difficult ask for manufacturers and
it won't all come at once
and it may stop and start a bit at times
we just have to manage that as best we
can
as it happens number three
we need people to take it this vaccine
isn't going to help you if you don't
take it
and you will need two doses of this
vaccine and most of the others
to have full protection
watching others take it and hoping that
this will then protect you
isn't going to work necessarily we don't
know if this vaccine will prevent
transmission
or any of them we have to wait for the
science to tell us
if it will prevent transmission though
we are very hopeful on that point
we also have to be patient to see the
real live
effects on transmission and
hospitalizations
and deaths and until we see that as
scientists
we can't then scope what the likely
impact is going to be
on bringing this pandemic to an
early end and rollout won't be instant
already on the jcvi phase one list
we have around about 30 million
people who are going to be targeted at
some point
and even if you gave me 60 million
vaccines here in this corner now
in a freezer of course but if you gave
me the 60 million
um i couldn't you know no no system in
the world could
distribute those really really quickly
in a matter of a few days
so we have to be realistic about how
long this is going to take it's going to
take months not weeks
and for now the other measures
the tier measures the social distancing
have to stay in place if we relax
too soon if we just kind of go are the
vaccines here
let's abandon caution all you're going
to do
is create a tidal wave of infections
and this vaccine's then got to work in a
headwind
to get back ahead of the game and that
will make it harder
and then the final point is look you
know everyone wants
social distancing to come to an end
we're fed up with it
nobody wants lockdowns and to see the
damage they do
but if you want that dream to come true
as quickly as it can come true
then you have to take the vaccine when
it's offered to you
low uptake will almost certainly make
restrictions last
longer and finally please
stick to the guidance until we say it is
safe to stop
thank you prime minister thanks very
much jonathan let's go to questions from
the public
first dylan from thousands of year 13
students like myself across the country
have been held in suspense
over the last few months over at a
levels
when does the government intend to
provide certainty as to what is being
planned for next summer
right dylan thank you very much and
first of all
i i want to thank uh everybody who's uh
been
in school and the efforts that schools
teachers pupils have gone to to
uh keep our schools going that's been
one of the prime objectives of
uh the way we fought the pandemic here
in uh in this country to to make sure
kids are
are in school uh dylan we're going to be
sending out some more tomorrow
about uh about exams but let me just say
that we want
exams to to go ahead we think they're
very
very important but we'll also be setting
out some ways which we're going to
help uh uh pupils to to do them
uh next summer given the exceptional
circumstances that uh
the country finds itself in and given
that uh you know so many
uh pupils have had their education
disrupted
by the pandemic so we'll be sending out
a lot more about that
uh tomorrow let's go to catherine
uh from from queneboro
and i'm sorry catherine asks which
hospitality tear restrictions
remain in place over the uh christmas
relaxation
uh will families be able to socialize in
pubs and restaurants
or just in their in their houses and
i'm i'm sorry to say um uh catherine
that we've got to stick with the
uh the the the guidance that we've uh
we've set out the tiering system
throughout the the christmas period
uh as simon was was was just saying and
jonathan
as well uh it would be a really fatal
mistake now
uh to uh to respond to this good news
uh by uh letting the virus uh you know
run riot again uh letting it get out of
uh control by
too much uh uh transmission over
over christmas and so that's why we've
got to stick uh very tightly to the
tearing
uh that we've uh we've set out um let's
go to questions from them
from the media fergus walsh bbc
prime minister now we have a vaccine how
important
is this moment uh well fergus this is a
a huge moment and uh as as
jvts jonathan van tan was just saying
it's
also a very moving thing and i'm really
lost in admiration for
for science uh and the ability of
scientists to to
solve human problems in the way that uh
they can and this is not easy i mean
don't bear in mind we've got a we've got
a a vaccine now for
for covid that really really works
there's no question that it
uh that it works but we haven't got a
vaccine for
uh for for sars or for for mers
for for hiv you know there's a
huge huge fantastic effort has gone into
this
and um when you consider the damage that
as i was saying earlier the damage that
this virus has done to
uh human life across the uh the planet
the economic damage the social damage to
say nothing of the
the cost in in life and and suffering it
is a fantastic moment
but you know to repeat the key message
the worst thing now
would be to think that this is the
moment when we can
relax our guard and uh think that it's
game over
in the fight against covid this is not
uh this is not the end
uh we have to fight on and we have to
continue with the
uh the tough measures that we've uh that
we've we've announced today
thanks very much uh fergus let's go to
uh to emily morgan of
itv hello thank you a question uh to you
prime minister
uh your scientists have said that care
home residents should be
the first people to get this uh vaccine
are you confirming then
that they won't be and if uh
not aren't you failing to protect our
most
vulnerable and if i may a question to
you simon stevens what are you doing
right now
to address this logistical challenge to
get
the vaccine to care homes sooner rather
than later
well i i think i'll i'll ask simon
to to to correct me if i've got this
wrong but you're quite right the the
issue is we of course we want to get it
uh
into care homes to protect the the most
vulnerable as fast as we
uh possibly can the the joint committee
on vaccination
and immunization has rightly said that
care home residents
must be a priority the the difficulty
is in distributing the the cases to
care homes each case has 975
vaccines in it and obviously you want to
avoid
wastage and the difficulty is that the
mhra has not yet
uh authorized the the people who would
be uh
transporting uh the vaccine to the to
the care homes
to be able to effect the division uh
themselves i know it sounds
uh complicated uh emily that's because
th this this vaccine and
and and jvt also jonathan may want to
come back on this
this vaccine is uh it's
it's it needs to be kept uh deep frozen
as you know minus
uh 75 there is a risk that if it is
allowed to to degenerate by being
improperly handled it simply
won't work so the rules around the
transport of this vaccine are extremely
important and
to get to your point about um speeding
this up and making sure we get it into
care homes uh as soon as possible
uh i we're expecting to hear more soon
from the mhra
about how that can happen but i think
it'd be fair to say that
uh there are we certainly want to be uh
putting it into
uh the the groups that uh simon uh
talked about
just now care home residents uh care
workers
uh nhs and above all above all
uh those above 80 uh who are the most
vulnerable our objective must be to use
the vaccine stocks that we have to
protect
those who are most likely not just to
fall ill
but to succumb to the disease that's the
that's the
what the j cvi has decided i think uh
quite rightly but uh
jonathan and simon if i may
come in prime minister say emily i think
your
remarks about failure are extremely
unfair
when one considers that a new virus
emerged
less than 12 months ago and we already
have our first vaccine
and professor stevens has been very
clear that
as soon as it is legally and technically
possible
to get the vaccine into care homes
we will do so but you know that this is
a complex
product with a very fragile cold chain
it's not a yogurt that can be taken out
of the fridge and put back in multiple
times it's really tricky to handle
and so i think you know we'll get there
as fast as we can
is the answer and we are trying
extremely hard
no i think you've both said it
absolutely accurately i mean we are
raring to go in the nhs we want to be
able to vaccinate people
in care homes for covid just as we
vaccinate care home residents for
many other things including winter flu
just as soon as we have the
regulatory sign off that we can do that
we can get the jabs
to the care homes so that the gps and
the nurses can then
arrive and give those care home
residents that took over vaccination we
will do that
and we at this point with the fair wind
fully expect that that will be in the
first tranche of uh priorities for
vaccination
uh during uh this month thanks very much
thanks emily let's go to beth rugby sky
news
thank you prime minister we've got two
big events today
celebrations about the vaccine but also
unhappiness
about the tier system you've told mps
that current restrictions will expire
on february the 3rd but given that you
also said in your covered winter plan
that january and february are
traditionally the hardest months for the
nhs the depths of winter
when our hospital wards are under the
greatest pressure
should we all still prepare for
restrictions to run
through to april and if i may to
professor van tan
one in five britons have said in a just
released yougov poll they're not
confident about this vaccine
how worried are you that people won't
take it
and given that you just said we don't
know if it reduces transmission
what percentage of the population would
need to take it
uh for it to be effective in us for to
be able to lift
restrictions thank you beth well first
of all just on the
on the tiering and yes of course you
know i totally
accept that uh it that they're tough the
these tiers are obviously
a huge amount of the economy is is
opened up but the
restrictions uh do remain tough
particularly
in tier three on hospitality and we
deeply deeply
regret that we're doing everything we
can to to help but
you know the the the way forward is not
just
the steady rollout of the vaccine that
we've uh and several vaccines we hope
that we've been describing over the next
few weeks and months
but also uh using uh
observation of the of the tiering plus
community
as as we have in as they have in
liverpool with great success 284 000
people in liverpool
uh took part in in community mass
testing
and so local leaders uh mps
everyone can get together to do those uh
community tests
and drive the uh and isolate the
positives
uh and uh help the negatives uh
to do things differently and that way
drive the the incidents down
and and get the virus under keep the
virus under control and come down the
tears
we hope we hope uh before uh easter as
well so that's the the tool that we see
uh working in addition uh to the vaccine
so beth thanks for the questions um
on a vaccine that reduces transmission
that is always the final big win if you
can get a vaccine that does that
because we can't be sure of that yet and
we'll have to wait and see if that
is the case with this vaccine and others
to follow i'm
quite optimistic but far from certain
um and because we can't say to what
extent the percentage of transmission
that is taken out by the vaccine because
it's not binary it's not kind of
it either does or it doesn't it's a
percentage that it will take out
until we know that and the scientists
can model that we won't be able to say
the kind of total
population vaccine uptake the magic
number you're after
and understand why you're after it but
we can't give it to you yet
um but i don't want to take away from
the fact that the not
immediate but quite in the foreground
almost as big win is stopping
people going into hospital with covid19
stopping them dying in hospital from
covid19
and removing that fear that they're
going to have to run that risk and
if we can do that that's much closer
in in the terms of time to the future
when we'll know those kind of answers
and we already know from the preliminary
data from astrazeneca
as in their press releases that they had
no hospital missions at all in the group
that received the vaccine so you know
those kind of things are very
encouraging
and if we can get the hospital burden
under control
then at that point and when we're
confident it's under control
we can start to think about what the
other options are
around the edges of getting um this
country back to normal which we all want
so much
so just kind of stay with us thanks
thank you thanks jump in quickly promise
just to be clear do you expect to roll
over the tier system on february the 3rd
well we will we will judge the situation
uh
uh as as i told the house yesterday
repeated today
uh on the on the basis of the of the
data
uh but uh i think for the time being
beth you've got to take it the tiering
is going to be a very very important
part of
our uh our campaign against coronavirus
and it's it's it's i think it's very
it's absolutely vital that people
continue
to stick to the guidance and uh and
follow the rules uh
that is completely crucial uh mesa
hall of the express uh thank you prime
minister um if i could ask the
medical experts first of all as the
vaccine is rolled out and we progress
through the priority list
at what stage would you feel it be right
to lift the majority of
the restrictions is it a matter of
inoculating people in the 70s 80s
who are most at risk or would you want
to see a much
greater proportion of population
vaccinated
and prime minister this vaccine has been
approved in the uk
faster than in eu countries is that
because
we've left the eu should we see this is
our first brexit bonus our first big
brexit bonus
and um on subject to brexit uh the eu is
saying that
there's now less than 72 hours left
to cut a deal how confident are you that
we can get a deal
in that time
so maybe on the first question i'm sure
jvc wants to come in as well
the goal of the vaccination program just
like in for coronavirus just like for
anything else
is firstly to protect vulnerable
individuals
and so the list that uh given
unfortunately coronavirus
strikes very unequally in terms of its
impact and you are at far greater
risk if you're over 80 than if you're in
your 30s and so forth that's why it's a
graduated
list of the most vulnerable people that
will help
protect them and then the second goal is
preventing people spreading it
unknowingly to others
and as jvt said we don't at this point
know whether this vaccine will have that
effect
but that's obviously one of the great
benefits that you get from
the winter flu vab jab it's the benefit
you get from the measle mumps and
rubella
jab so there is a good sort of reason
for thinking that that might be the case
but we don't
definitively know that that's the case
as we sit here today
so mesa all i would add to that is to
say that
the jcvi priority list phase one
which takes us down to people 50 years
of age
and over and obviously under the age of
under the age of 50
if you're in an at-risk group
taken together those groups it's not an
accident
that they take out with a very effective
vaccine and very high uptake
99 of covid related mortality
deaths in the uk this is not an accident
that that's how we got that's how jcvi
got
to the phase one priority listing
yeah and uh mesa just on your question
about you know how come the
the uk is uh seeming to get the the
vaccine
uh soon early uh perhaps ahead of many
other countries
i think that's that's really down to the
to the vaccine task force uh
uh more than anything else and uh and
the way they've gone out to
uh to organize that but you know what i
would say about this
all these vaccines all seven of the ones
that the uk is backing that these belong
these are global efforts you've got
scientists around the world coming
together
uh to make this possible and it's a
truly it's a truly international thing
and very very
uh moving to to see it on uh
brexit and uh and and where we are with
the negotiations well
uh you know we we're working we remain
uh absolutely committed to trying to
to get a deal if we if we can i think
our friends
uh know the uh what the uk
uh bottom line is and what people voted
for in
uh on june the 23rd 2016. uh they voted
to take back control it's about
uh it's about making sure that the uk is
able to
uh to run its own uh
laws its own fisheries and uh and so on
and that's that's
fundamentally what it's what it's all
about and that's what we're that's what
we're all working for um let's go to
hugo guy of the eye thank you uh prime
minister
when you first announced the new tiering
system that's come into effect today
uh you suggested that it was likely to
stay in place until the end of
march given the good news on vaccines
recently
is there a chance that that day could
change and that the
uh current covid restrictions could be
ended early and
professor von van tam can i say can i
ask there's there's been a lot of
attention on the precise
details of the covid rules recently
but perhaps less attention on uh the
broader principles
of how people can protect themselves
against kovid and how kovitz transmitted
are you confident
that the public knows enough about the
risks of covert transmission
particularly for example issues around
ventilation which it now seems maybe
more important than
than other factors that were stressed
early in the pandemic
yeah well hugo on your first question
which a lot of
uh colleagues have asked in one way or
the other what difference does this make
to the
to the tearing or first thing to say is
for now
it makes absolutely no difference
absolutely no difference we've got to
focus on
uh keeping the virus under control
getting it done
tough tiering mass community testing as
i've described
but clearly as we go on in the next uh
weeks and
and months and hopefully we're able to
use
testing and the vaccine to to drive it
down there
i suppose there will come a moment when
the as the graph of people
fed up with graphs but if you imagine a
a
the graph of uh immunized uh vaccinated
inoculated people going up
uh one way then uh there will come a
moment when we're able obviously
to start to relax the the
non-pharmaceutical
interventions the uh all the things that
that
uh drive us you know that are so
difficult uh we'll be able
steadily uh we hope uh to take those
off just as as community testing uh
allows what we hope will allow areas to
come down the
uh the tiering scales but we're not
there yet uh hugo and i've got to stress
that you know
this is theoretical we've got to wait
and see how fast we can
vaccinate people uh it's weeks months
of work to to go before we're in that uh
we're in that situation
alas but you know thank goodness uh we
now have
a vaccine to work with so
thank you hugo on the point about
ventilation i think you make a very good
point indeed
and it's not just because i have some
far eastern origins i'm a great admirer
of the japanese system of looking for
risk
for transmission of kovid the three c's
to which i had myself d and v
uh the first seek look for closed spaces
often ones with low ventilation they are
risk areas
the second c look for situations where
there's going to be crowding
or where you can't avoid crowding the
third c
look for situations where close contact
particularly indoors
is likely to happen and then finally
on top of all that think about how long
you're going to be in those situations
d duration and then finally
on top of that think v volume how loud
and noisy is it going to be
with people shouting with raised voices
singing etc
in those kind of closed low ventilation
spaces
these are all recipes for transmission i
hope that helps
thanks very much uh hugo let's go to
harry cole lastly harry cole of the sun
thank you prime minister a question for
professor van tam i know you can't give
us a magical number of
how many people will need to be
vaccinated before we can begin to
lift some measures but can you envisage
your world perhaps
in the winter a new normal where masks
and hand sanitizers just become
part of everyday life and prime minister
um i don't think i heard you give a
direct answer to mace's question there
is this a brexit bonus
have we uh have we beat in the world to
this because we're free from brussels
um and are you concerned that 70 of your
mps
were unable to back you last night and
aren't you staring at a defeat in
february or what are you going to do to
win over
your own party on your tier system given
there an open mutiny
um well jbt you know
you want to go first yeah thank you
thank you prime minister
so um harry to your question um
i'll answer it in kind of three chunks
if i may
number one i don't think we're going to
eradicate
coronavirus ever i think it's going to
be
with humankind forever
secondly i think we may
get to a point where coronavirus becomes
a
seasonal problem i don't want to draw
too many parallels with flu
but possibly that is the kind of way we
would learn to live with it
and the third point is do i think there
will come a
big moment where we kind of you know
have a massive party and throw on masks
and hand sanitizer
and say that's it it's behind us like
the end of the war
no i don't i think those kind of habits
that we've learned from
that clearly stop the spread of other
respiratory viruses
such as flu will perhaps persist for
many years and
that may be a good thing if they do
um yeah so maybe a good thing or on the
other hand we may want to
get back to life as pretty much as close
to normal but you know they
i mean i i i anyway i hope i have high
hopes that the
uh that eventually the vaccine will make
a a very very significant difference the
way we
uh we live our we live our lives uh but
um
harry on your on your your point about
you know why we're why
we're we're we're lucky enough uh to be
in the position on on
on vaccines again i'm going to uh
exercise a self-denying audience my
favorite uh
uh diplomacy and uh intact and just
say i think that this is something that
uh you know has been
we've been working on uh the nhs has
been working on for a long time
uh the uh the vaccine task force many
people have been working on this
uh very hard for a long time i pay
tribute to to all of them
and as for um you know what might happen
in
uh in future decisions of the house of
commons
on um where we should go in the in the
tears
i totally understand people's
frustrations uh
with the the tearing system i understand
people who feel
uh frustrated because they feel they're
in the wrong tier uh
they've been attracted into uh too
higher tier by proximity
uh to some uh other neighborhood that uh
has higher incidence of infection i i
know how people feel about it it's
incredibly
frustrating uh what we are going to do
and i said this
many times today and and yesterday we're
going to make sure that we
are as as local and as and as
uh you know sensitive as we can possibly
be
to local achievement and local incidents
of the
of the disease but don't forget the the
thing i keep saying is that you know
there is this opportunity
with mass community testing for people
to acquire agency
in this and to get a test squeeze the
disease
uh kick curve it out even before uh the
vaccine comes
so so harry i'd like to come back
because i do like to be
um challenged when i have perhaps not
made myself clear and the prime minister
has
picked me up on this occasion and it's
quite all right and publicly
don't know but it's quite all right
because it gives me a chance to clarify
what i mean here
i do not think the government will
continue
to have to recommend social distancing
masks and hand sanitizer
forever and a day i hope we will get
back to a much more normal world
but the point i was trying to make was
do i think
possibly some of those personal habits
for some people will persist
longer and perhaps become enduring for
some people
yes i think that's possible as a as in
as in the far east yes yeah well who
knows who knows
um thank you very much everybody that's
uh that uh concludes the
session today thanks harry
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news